Can physics help us understand life.
So, uh,
we spoke so confidently about the laws of physics,
being able to explain reality, but,
and we even said was like theory of everything,
implying that the word everything is actually describing everything.
Is it possible that the four laws we've been talking about are
actually missing, they are accurate in describing what they're describing,
but they're missing the description of a lot of other things like emergence
of life, uh, and emergence of perhaps consciousness.
So is there,
do you ever think about this kind of stuff where we would need to
understand extra physics to try to explain
the emergence of these complex pockets of
interesting,
weird stuff that we call life and consciousness in this big
homogeneous universe that's mostly boring and nothing is happening.
First of all,
we don't claim that string theory is the theory of everything in a sense that we
know enough what this theory is.
We don't know enough about string theory itself. We are learning it.
So I wouldn't say, okay,
give me whatever I will tell you whether it's hard to work. No. However,
I would say by definition, by definition to me, physics is checking all reality,
any form of reality, I call it physics. That's my definition. I mean,
I may not know a lot of it, like maybe the origin of life and so on.
Maybe a piece of that, but I will call that as part of physics. To me,
reality is what we're after I don't claim, I know everything about reality.
I don't claim string theory necessarily has the tools right now to describe all
the reality either, but we are learning what it is.
So I would say that I would not put a border to say, no, you know,
from this point onwards, it's not my territory, it's somebody else's.
But whether we need new ideas in string theory to describe other reality,
reality features, for sure, I believe as I mentioned,
I don't believe anythings any of the laws we know today is final.
So therefore yes, we will need new ideas.
Very tricky thing for us to understand
and be precise about.
But just because you understand the physics
doesn't necessarily mean that you understand the
emergence of chemistry, biology, life,
intelligence consciousness. So those are built.
It's like a, you might understand the way bricks work,
but to understand what it means to have a happy family,
you don't construct, you don't get from the bricks.
So the directly you write a theory, you could, uh,
if you ran the universe over again,
but just understanding the rules of the universe doesn't necessarily give you a
sense of the beautiful things that emerge.
No. So let me describe what you just said. There are two questions.
One is whether or not the techniques I use in,
let's say quantum field theory and so on. Will describe how the society works.
Yes. Okay. This is far distance, far,
four different scales of questions that we're asking here. The question is,
is there a change of,
is it a new law which takes over that cannot be connected to the older laws
that we know or more fundamental laws that we know?
Do you need new laws to describe?
I don't think that's necessarily the case in many of these phenomena,
like chemistry or so on. You mentioned. So we do expect, you know, in principle,
chemistry can be described by quantum mechanics.
We don't think there's going to be a magical thing,
but chemistry is complicated. Yeah. These are rules of chemistry that, you know,
chemists are put down, which has not been explained yet using quantum mechanics.
Do I believe that they will be a, something described by quantum mechanics? Yes,
I do. I don't think they are going to be sitting there in the shows forever,
but maybe it's too complicated then maybe, you know,
we will wait for a very powerful quantum computers or whatnot to solve those
problems. I don't know, but I don't think in that context,
we have no principles to be added to fix those. So by, by, by,
I'm perfectly fine in the intermediate situation to have rules of thumb or
principles that chemists have found, which already working,
which are not founded on the basis of quantum mechanical laws,
which does the job similarly,
as biologists do not found everything in terms of chemistry, but they think,
you know, there's no reason why chemistry cannot.
They don't think necessarily they're doing something amazingly not possible with
chemistry coming back to your question, does consciousness, for example,
bring this new ingredient. If indeed it needs a new ingredient.
I will call that new ingredients part of physical law.
We have to understand it to me that so I wouldn't put a line to say, okay,
from this point onwards, you cannot, it's disconnected.
It's fully disconnected from string theory,
whatever we have to do something else.
Line.
What I'm referring to is can physics of a few centuries from now that doesn't
understand cautiousness be much bigger than the physics of today
where the, the textbook grows.
It definitely will. I would say I would not.
I don't know if it grows because of consciousness being part of it,
or we have different view of conscience.
I do not know where the consciousness will fit. I'm not,
it's going to be hard for me to, to, to, to guess. I mean,
I can make random guesses now, which probably most right.
Most likely it's wrong, but let me just do just for the sake of discussion,
you know, I could say, you know, you know,
brain could be their quantum computer, classical computer,
their arguments against this being a quantum thing. So it's probably classical.
And if it's classical,
it could be like what we are doing in machine learning slightly more fancy and
so on. Okay. People can go to this argument to know, and,
and to some where they're cautious things, this is our life.
Does it have any meaning or is there,
is there a phase transition where you can say,
does electron have a life or not the,
at what level does the particle become life?
Maybe there's no definite definition of life in that same way that, you know,
we cannot say electronic, if you, you know, a good,
I like this example quite a bit. Um, you know,
we distinguish between liquid and a gas phase, like water is liquid or,
or vapors gas. And we say, there are different. You can distinguish them.
Actually. That's not true.
It's not true because we know from physics that you can change temperatures and
pressure to go from liquid to the gas without making any face transition.
So there is no point that you can say this was a liquid and this was a gas.
You can continuously change the parameters to go from one to the other.
So at the end, it's three different looking like, you know,
I know that water is different from vapor, but you know,
there is no precise point. This happens.
I feel many of these things that we think like consciousness clearly dead person
is not conscious on.
The other one is so there's a difference like water and vapor,
but there's no point you could say that this is conscious.
There's no sharp transition.
So it could very well be that what we call heuristically in daily
life consciousness is similar. Life is similar to that.
I don't know if it's like that or not. I'm just hypothesizing as possible.
Like there's no.
There's not discrete phases. There's.
No phase transition like that.
But this, you might, there might be, you know,
concepts of temperature and pressure that we need to understand, uh,
to describe what the high consciousness in life is that,
that we're totally missing. You think that's not a useless question.
Even those questions that is back to our original discussion of philosophy,
I would say consciousness and free will, for example,
are topics that are very much so in the realm of philosophy
currently, I don't think they will always be.
I agree with, I agree with you. And I think I am,
I'm fine with some topics being part of a different realm than physics today
because we don't have the right tools, just like biology was. I mean,
before we had DNA and all that genetics and other gradually began to take hold.
I mean, at the, when Mandela, when people were beginning with face experiments,
with biology and chemistry and some big gradually they came together.
So it wasn't like together. So yeah,
I'll be perfectly understanding of a situation where we don't have the tools.
So do the experiments that you think as is defined the conscious in different
format gradually we will build it and connect it. And yes,
we might discover new principles of nature that we didn't know. I don't know,
but I would say that if they are, they will be deeply connected with yes,
we don't. We, we have never, we have seen in physics,
we don't have things in isolation. You cannot, you cannot compartmentalize,
you know, this is gravity, this is electricity. This is that we have learned.
They all talk to each other. There's no way to make them, you know,
in one corner and don't talk so same thing with anything,
anything which is real. So consciousness is real.
So therefore we have to connect it to everything else. So to me,
once you connect it, you cannot say it's not reality.
And it wants its reality is physics is I call it physics.
It's may not be the physics I know today for sure. It's not, but,
but I wouldn't. I would,
I would be surprised if there's disconnected realities that you cannot,
you cannot imagine them as part of the same soup.
So I guess a God doesn't have a biology, chemistry textbook and mostly,
or maybe, uh,
he or she reads it for fun biology and chemistry bone in trying to get some work
done. I'll be going to the physics textbook.